---
layout: post
title:  "Pivoting yourself"
date:   2018-03-14
excerpt: ""
tag:
- blogpost
---
'Pivot' is a term that used heavily in the start-up community. It happens when a company realizes that they have built core assets or expertise in a field that is distinct from their current offering. The company pivots and starts to offer a different service that is more valuable to the market. Pivoting is crucial for many start-up sucesses. Pivoting was also crucial to my early career success. I realize through my volunteer work that I am not alone in my past desire to pivot my career trajectory and am documenting my experience in hopes to provide motivation and aide to others like me. 


I completed an undergraudte degree with an honors specialization in biochemistry and cell biology. I didn't quite know what I wanted to do with this degree. During my honors thesis research project I used a technology that required some programming. I took advantage of this opportunity to teach myself how to program so that I could understand all facets of my project. Completing fourth year I didn't have much direction. I graduated at the top of my class but unlike the majority of my cohort, I wasn't dead set on medical school. I ended up doing what most science students do when they don't know what they want to be when they grow up and accepted an invitation to graduate school in the same lab. I decided to pursue a thesis that combined computation and molecular biochemistry in equal parts. I quickly realized that I was dissatisfied with the goverance of research in Canada. A combination of inadequate funding, irreproducible research and shaky standards. Moreover, I loathed how long it took for wet lab experiments to fail. In some situations it could take hours (PCR), days (tranformation) or even weeks (protein purification, cloning) to realize that something didn't work as intended. It wasn't all bad though, I knew that I loved to troubleshoot experiments and creatively solve challenging problems. I loved diving into the technical details and project planning/managment. Coding allowed me to combine all these things while also allowing failures to be discovered quickly. Faulty code would fail within minutes and even provided error messages and tracebacks, very different from the black box troubleshooting of plasmid cloning. Furthermore, job searching revealed that positions in medical science research were scarce whereas programming jobs were countless. I knew that my curiosity had uncovered a passion for programming but I was met with a loathing realization. At this point, I had spent 4.5 years pursuing degree's in medical science. It was my time to pivot. 

Perhaps it was ignorance but I truly believed that I would be able to leverage the little programming knowledge I had into a career. I came up with a plan, I would research during the day, learn programming at night and spend the next year building a portfolio so that when I finished my Masters, I would be ready to enter the work force as a programmer. I ended up focusing on two main areas in computer science, machine learning and web development. I had performed data wrangling and used machine learning packages to build models for my Masters thesis (In fact, my wet lab work was done to validate these machine learning models), so I had the most prior knowledge in this area. Web development had a low barrier to entry and I had always been interested in being able to deploy my mathematical models to world wide web. I started attending workshops and hackathongs. I had to really put myself out there, swallow my pride and be really vulnerable. It tested my perserverance but my curiosity and passion is what got me through these times. 

As my masters came to a close, I had developed a portfolio that showcased my analytical, visualization and web development skill set. At this point, I was most proficient in R, had some experience in html and css with little experience using ruby and python. My portfolio consisted of a analyses' and visualizations that I completed as part of my Masters thesis, a manual for completing a knn parameter tuning, and the code for the website where my portfolio was hosted. I was now ready to start the job hunt. I must have applied to over 100 jobs ranging from bioinformatician, web development and data science. I was intially very confident that I would be able to at least score a bioinformatician role. I read many job descriptions that I had direct experience for and thought I was perfect for, but I found little success in the job application process. I attended conferences and meetups because as the old adage goes, it's not what you know but who you know. I had more success in these situations and even scored an interview at a company that I thought I could thrive in. Unfortunately this also fell through. This job hunt experience was very challenging, it was also very humbling. This process made me question all my life choices. Maybe I should have completed my PhD and pursued academia, maybe I should have tried harder to get into medical school or maybe I should go back to school for computer science (I had applied and gained entry to two post grad computer science programs as a backup). This process was very humbling and I had to lean on my support system extensively.

I ended up changing my tactics. Although I continued applying to job postings on sites like Indeed, I searched google for start-ups that combined my interests. Finding start-ups that combined my biological, analytical and programming skillset made me much more qualified for their technological positions. I ended up finding this company named Cyclica. A proteome-docking software company that hoped to turn their analytics pipeline into a SaaS application. At the time they had a single developer working for them. I came to the interview with my portfolio and it went really well. I was offered a position as the second developer on the deveopment team. In all honestly, it took me about 3 months to really level up and develop my programming chops. Working on small personal projects was very different from working on a full fledged SaaS product. I had very little understanding of object oriented design patterns, writing database queires or even how REST APIs worked. After working at Cyclica for four months, we added 4 new developers to our team and now I have worked at Cyclica for almost two years. I have gained a lot more confidence in my programming abilities during this time. I frequently work with people from traditional computer science backgrounds, although they may have more theorectical computer science knowledge, I bring a unique skillset that I have developed from my experiences. I spent a lot of time developing my ability to understand biological networks and devising experiements to elucidate how small facets contribute to the larger process. This transferrable skill facitiltates my strong ability to troubleshoot networks of code, objects and functions because I approach errors in a very methodical and structured manner with the ability to build complex networks in my head. Once you've had to troubleshoot experiments on a molecular scale, troubleshooting things you can see and readily interact with becomes a dream. Additionally, doing independent research allowed me to plan and orchestrate long-term technical projects. Thinking of feature improvements is something that comes naturally to a researcher that is always thinking of extensions of their work and how other work informs their own. 

Over the course of my career pivot, I am now a professional developer. I am proficient in Python and Javascript and have used PostgreSQL, Django, Django-REST, docker, Google Cloud Platform, React, Redux, Scikit-learn, Keras, and many more technologies. I recently even contributed to an open source project. I have always been drawn to revelotuionary technologies, I leveraged my experience in genome editing and next-generation sequencing to become a programmer and data scientist. I've gone through tough times to get here and know that I will go through more. The most important thing is to keep confidence in yourself and know that even though it will take a lot of work, you can achieve anything you set your mind to. 
